NEURAL NETS FOR PERSONAL INVESTING: ISSUES
by William Arnold

This version, submitted to us by the author, is an adaptation of his 
original article submitted to HEURISTICS:  The Journal of Intelligent 
Technologies, published in their special issue: Neural Networks for 
Financial Systems, v9, #1.
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
In business, Neural Nets have found a diverse range of applications, being 
used to predict everything from the highest achievable selling price for a 
two-bedroom house with a swimming pool and good "curb appeal" to the effect 
of various wage levels on the corporate staff attrition rate.  Financial 
institutions now use the Networks almost routinely to aid in securities 
analysis, and the applications used in this process are understandably 
complex and expensive to create and maintain. 
   
This does not mean, though, that only financial professionals are capable 
of constructing and using such programs. Many commercial Neural Net 
products include financial forecasting tutorials because these provide 
effective demonstrations of the most powerful program features.  
Examining these demonstration models, it is apparent that the architecture 
of the networks is similar to that of chemical, environmental or 
character-recognition programs.  Perhaps this observation is standing the 
matter on its head, because in the development process many software 
packages were initially designed with the lucrative financial-forecasting 
market in mind, with other applications added on later to increase 
marketability. 
 
Although they are useful in demonstrating features, these tutorials are 
more or less toy applications -- they don't deal with real securities, real 
data or real money.  Knowledge of setting up and implementing the networks 
is only part of what is required to bridge the gap between a tutorial and a 
practical  personal investment tool.  The ultimate goal may be to develop a 
network or group of networks to aid in investment decisions, but even if 
this goal is not achieved , the effort almost certainly will yield 
knowledge both of the applications and of the financial markets as a 
corollary benefit.   
 
Actually, constructing the network itself may not be the primary problem.
It may be putting a network together without expending 
more time and money than we want to commit.  We can apply this insight 
immediately.  We need to select a software package, either for purchase or 
online access.  There are many such packages available, falling into two 
categories : stand-alone applications and those designed to add into 
spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel.  Deciding which of 
these to choose is based on the availability of the spreadsheet, and 
perhaps as importantly on operator facility with the spreadsheet program.  
Various data entry routines and data manipulations are obviously required 
in constructing the networks, and utilities included in the stand-alone 
packages are specifically designed to facilitate these. On the other hand, 
making networks using an add-in package may serve to increase operator 
capabilities with the spreadsheet program. 
 
Very low-cost shareware packages are available on the Internet; some of 
these have excellent features.  The drawback of getting programs in this 
way is that when it comes to support you get what you pay for.  Moving 
into a new application, particularly in unfamiliar terrain, can be expected 
to entail getting help from those who have been through the exercise 
before.  Additionally, for commercial software packages evaluations are 
available[1] to facilitate easy comparison.  The value of the time saved  
in using the telephone-help service provided by commercial vendors, and the 
more complete support that is provided must be weighed against the 
additional upfront cost.  In selecting the network, it is perhaps best to 
look at the cost of the telephone support as well; this argues for buying a 
software package from a nearby company. 
 
Once the software is bought, unpacked and installed, it is a good idea to 
go through the tutorials ... all of them. It soesn't hurt to see all of 
the features of the software deemed worthy of display by the programmers.  
As a side excursion, particular attention should be paid to any horse-
racing applications that are included, since handicappers are apparently 
among the most successful users of Neural Net programs.  It may be that 
there is a higher signal-to-noise ratio in data from Saratoga than there is 
in data from Wall Street. 
 
The software documentation, and the programs themselves, are tempting, but 
at this point they are distractions. We could well experiment with 
transfer functions, learning parameters, and the like; that's what 
engineers and scientists like to do. For financial applications, though, 
the network nuts and bolts are in many cases considered fine-tuning tools 
even by advanced practitioners.  To see how, or even whether such tinkering 
will be useful, we need a first-approximation network.  To get this, there 
are a few tiny decisions we must make. For example, what are we going to 
try to predict (in neurocomputing terms, what's the pattern?).  What data 
will be used to predict it?  
 
The network is a market-timing tool, but a well-selected target security is 
crucial to the overall success of the investment.  In the search for a 
pattern worthy of analysis and eventual investment, some additional 
guidance is provided by Peter Lynch, an enormously successful Mutual Fund 
manager turned author.  His five-word advice to investors :  Invest In What 
You Know.  As technologists, if we are aware of a given technology area 
that is currently doing well, this is an excellent choice, since we may 
know more about technology's future than  do most investors.  However, some 
investors may not recognize the importance of selecting securities that are 
already showing good economic performance.  One of the oldest saws on Wall 
Street is "don't fight the tape", referring to the ticker-tape where 
transactions are displayed.  It is indeed possible to find bargains in 
areas that are not generally prosperous, but this is more an exercise for 
gamblers or for those who invest lots of time unearthing opportunities than 
for ordinary investors. 
 
More specifically, what sort of investment vehicle should be selected as 
the target?   The network is being counted upon to cover for lack of 
sophistication in securities analysis, but we face a signal-to-noise 
problem as individual securities may fluctuate in price unpredictably.  
Fortunately, the Mutual Fund industry has developed investment vehicles 
that are very well tailored for network requirements.  Several fund 
families offer what are called sector funds: baskets of various stocks 
concentrated in a particular indistry.  Fidelity, Vanguard, T. Rowe Price 
and Invesco, among others, offer such funds.  The sales charges and expense 
ratios for these funds are available at any library; many investors feel 
that these charges are a fair price for the diversification of investments 
offered by the funds.  This diversification is meant to shield investors 
somewhat from adversities affecting individual companies, but it also has 
the effect of damping fluctuations in share prices.  

An additional 
advantage of Mutual Funds is the ease with which they can be bought and 
sold, and this may come in handy if the investment regime indicates 
frequent buying and selling.  Of course, considerations of restrictions and 
costs of such transactions apply here as elsewhere.   One criterion 
peculiar to the selection of a pattern for the Neural Nets involves the 
magnitude of the share price.  If the price per share is relatively high, 
then a given percentage fluctuation will be a larger value, which may be 
easier for the network to recognize.  Another way of looking at this is to 
observe that more shadings of value increase or decrease are possible if 
the magnitude of  price change can be large or small.  Additionally, when 
the Net Asset Value of the security is calculated for each time period, 
there is some rounding error involved. As the share price of a security 
grows, this error becomes less important. 
 
In addition to selecting a target security, consideration must be given to 
data that will be used to predict its future value.  If we are 
approaching this as a pattern-recognition problem, we will be looking to 
interpret some sort of  business-cycle data.  But opening up a copy of 
Barron's or the Wall Street Journal reveals page after page of data, any 
column of which is a potential input.  A sort of overall, fundamental 
approach is needed to select the useful inputs. 
 
The number and variety of the sector funds suggests an approach based on 
the observations that uptrends in the performance of certain  economic 
sectors tends to lead or lag that of others in a fairly predictable 
fashion(2). Observers of market history agree that with each passing year 
institutions have more influence in the market.  Collectively, Mutual Fund 
managers paid on the basis of performance against benchmark indices such as 
the Dow Jones Industrials or NASDAQ Composite have a great deal of 
influence over the direction of the market.  In quest of superior 
performance, these managers tend to jump from one area of the market to the 
next, riding industry trends and switching emphasis with the ebb and flow 
of profitability in various sectors. The idea of using the price 
performance of the sector funds as inputs is appealing enough.  There is 
even a chance that we could construct networks consisting entirely of the 
price action for the funds, with some funds playing the role of pattern on 
some networks, and as input on others. 
 
But this may not be a good idea for several reasons.  For example, even the 
dozens of sector funds leave some areas of the economy sparsely covered.  
For another, the funds are managed for maximum performance, regardless of 
how the sector or economy is doing at the time.  Holdings of such funds are 
thus often confined to just a few companies, and substantial cash may 
accumulate in some funds.  In addition, the funds pay distributions,  
giving back a portion of their earnings to shareholders.  When the fund Net 
Asset Value is adjusted for these distributions, the result is a sudden 
one-day drop in the share price unrelated to the actual market action for 
that day.  Since the price for later days reflects this charge, there is no 
straightforward way in which to adjust for this phenomenon.  In the pattern 
security, we can dig into the spreadsheet and make an acceptable adjustment 
by hand.  For dozens or hundreds of inputs, however, this process is not 
too satisfactory. 
 
There is also the question of where to get data for our inputs.  Virtually 
every kind of material imaginable is available on the Internet.  As of this 
writing, though, data of the type that we need is  not available online--
not for free, in any event. No matter how the data is obtained, some sort 
of underlying rationale is needed as a guide in selecting it. 
 
Data on stock-market sectors, suitable and seemingly tailor-made for Neural 
Net use, is in fact cheaply available. The Standard and Poors Company has 
formulated composites of dozens of industry groups(and sub-groups, and it 
often appears, sub-sub-groups).  These composites are pre-adjusted for 
distributions to shareholders, and are published in tables.  Their most 
convenient form is the table of  index weekly closing prices, entitled 
Current Statistics, available at most libraries.  If we use these data as 
inputs, we can match them with the weekly closing prices of our pattern 
Mutual Fund, to predict the closing price of the fund one week in advance. 
 
These data are also available, on a daily as well as a weekly basis, from 
download services, but the use of stock-analysis software and a download 
service may add hundreds of dollars to the cost of the network, and may 
wipe out any potential profits we stand to make.  Many professional 
securities traders find weekly data sufficient for their purposes(3).There 
is an additional argument for sticking to weekly data:  to cover a given 
time period, a weekly network will require only one-fifth as many  
spreadsheet entries as a daily network .  The cheapest way of accessing the 
data is indeed to hand-keypunch the S&P data into the spreadsheet.  
Presumably we will do this ourselves, as we wouldn't dream of asking a 
subordinate or spouse to toil at such drudgery.  This is a lot of data 
entry, so a careful look at the data is merited:  is there some way to 
avoid entering data on all of the over 100 groups covered by S&P? 
 
There is in fact ample reason to believe that some trimming can be done.  
Practically, each Neural Net seems to function best with some optimum 
number of inputs:  given too few, the network doesn"t "learn" all of the 
dimensions of the data surface, and given too many, the network takes an 
excessively long time adjusting weights between neurons reflecting 
redundant information--and we run the risk of "memorization" as well(4).   
Without a lot of experimentation, there is no way of determining how many 
of these groups we can cut out. As a reasonable approximation, and keeping 
in mind that we will find it easier to cut data later than to add it, we 
can go through the groups, eliminating obvious redundancies, and come up 
with a reduction of about 50%.   We should be careful, though.  In general 
Neural Net Theory, and also specifically in financial applications, 
considerable thought has been given to the process of "pruning" inputs(5).  
On the face of things, it makes sense not to include two inputs possessing 
a Correlation Coefficient of, say, 0.8.  However, the advisability of 
deleting one of these as an input lies in the importance of the 
uncorrelated information that will be lost (this amounts to 36% based on the 
correlation). The information discarded may turn out to have been 
indispensable. 
 
As an example, consider the following list of Industry Groups as the input 
matrix for the networks: 
 
S&P 100                  Capital Goods            Consumer goods 
Energy composite         Entertainment/Leisure    Aluminum 
Automobiles              Heavy Duty Trucks        Building Materials 
Chemicals Composite      Specialty Chemicals      Communications Eqpt		 
Conglomerates            Containers(Metal/Glass)  Insurance Composite  
Paper Containers         Electrical Equipment     Defense Electronics 
Electronic Instruments   Engineering/Construction Foods 
Gold Mining              Hardware/Tools           Homebuilding 
Health Care Composite    Health Care/Drugs        Medical Products 
Hotel/Motel              Household Products       Machine Tools 
Diversified Industrials  Manufactured Housing     Metals Misc. 
Office Supplies          Oil composite            Oil Equipment 
Paper/Forest Products    Pollution Control        Savings and Loan 
Publishing               Retail Store Composite   Retail/Department Stores 
Retail/Food              Retail/Gen. Merchandise  Steel 
Textile                  Electric Companies       Natural Gas 
Telephone                Airlines                 Railroads 
Truckers                 Bank Composite           Center Banks 
Regional Banks           Computers  
						 
This would leave out the following groups, among  many others: 
 
S&P Small Cap Index      High Tech Composite      Low Price Common Stock 
Autos(except GM)         Beverages Alcoholic      Beverages/Soft Drink 
Broadcast Media          Computer Software        Computers(except IBM) 
Elec/Semiconductors      Cnsmr. Product Dist      Healthcare 
Hospital Management      Leisure Time             Shoes 

Even with the loss of information from the omitted groups, we have a 
sizable input matrix.  Nonetheless the selections cover most of the 
economy, with overlapping coverage for the areas most likely to help in our 
prediction.  Yet these selections reflect a conscious effort to cover 
diverse areas of the economy instead of concentrating on technology itself. 
 
There will of necessity be strict limits on the time period that the 
network covers, and there are some clues as to how long this might be.  In 
its own fashion, our network is to make value judgments on the economic 
factors  driving the overall economy.  These change over time--after all, 
that is part of the rationale for the construction of the network from 
sector data.  Over how long a period can these factors be expected to 
remain consistent enough to give us a solid pattern? 
 
Mutual funds advertise performance based on one-year and ten-year figures, 
set in type of various sizes depending on how favorable these figures 
appear.  While Fund Managers might grudgingly reconcile themselves to being 
evaluated on performance for periods as short as one year, it is no secret 
that such evaluations are short-sighted.  At the other end of the scale, we 
can't expect coherent economic forces over ten years.  Three to five years 
is a reasonable compromise, and many Technical Analysts evaluate time-
series data using weighted or exponentially smoothed averages, which  by 
greatly decreasing the influence of the earliest data give extra, well, 
weight to the argument for a three-year period. 
 
In constructing the network, difference columns are formed from the raw 
price data; this enables the network to see the price fluctuations more 
dramatically than  if the raw prices are used. To filter out some random 
noise, moving averages are formed, and it is at this point that a 
difference between daily and weekly data becomes apparent.  Daily data 
obviously contains more noise than weekly data--effectively, the weekly 
data is self-smoothing.  While financial institutions are not particularly 
forthcoming regarding the particulars of their network Programs, experiment 
has shown that daily data often requires five-period smoothing, rendering 
it almost equivalent to weekly data.  For weekly figures two to three 
periods of smoothing are often used. 
 
Each weekly set of inputs or fact presented to the network must contain 
some time history to produce a prediction.  Ignoring the  moving-average 
smoothing for the moment, note that use of a  three-period time distance to 
the oldest prediction takes into account events that  have occurred a month 
before the prediction date.  Without more information regarding the 
relative weight accorded to older data, it is reasonable to use inputs 
representing prices one, two and three weeks ago, with the possibility of 
sorting things out better after obtaining performance figures for the 
network. 
 
Inputs may be grouped in several ways.  Using, for instance, the S&P Gold 
Mining Stock Index as a starting point, we can group the inputs as the  
Gold Index raw price difference,  Gold Index moving average, and this 
moving average one, two, and three periods ago.  We can also look at the 
inputs in classes of  all the raw  index price differences, moving 
averages, and averages for the various time periods.  In constructing the 
spreadsheeet, column headings will facilitate our analysis of the network 
by designating the Gold Index as, say, p18, the difference as d18, moving 
average as m18, and the time-displaced averages as t18, 2t18 and 3t18.  If 
we get a statistical report of the importance of the various inputs, 
tabulated by the name of each input, we can (somewhat) easily form 
conclusions about which inputs have the highest influence.  We might also 
happen into a situation where, for example , the time-displaced values from 
two periods ago turn out have high predictive capacity.  Without systematic 
naming of inputs, this sort of hidden relationship is difficult to 
recognize. 
 
With 56 inputs processed through moving averages and time displacements, 
the spreadsheet contains a total of 280 inputs.  Using a commercial stand-
alone Neural Network package and a hand-keypunched textfile spreadsheet 
containing a 143-week run of S&P Index data, a number of networks were set 
up and tested.  After  some experimentation, the Fidelity Select Technology 
Fund was picked as the target security.  Networks trained using the T. Rowe 
Price Science and Technology Fund, the Invesco Strategic Technology Fund 
and the yield on the 30-year U.S. Treasury bond generated less accurate 
predictions for this input set, with the Invesco Fund networks showing some 
usefulness and the bond yield networks the least effective.  The software 
divided the data set into training(90%) and test(10%) sets.  The noisiness 
of the S&P data means that this division is more likely to yield an 
unrepresentative test set than would be the case if the data were more 
homogeneous(5).  Instead of the usual practice of reserving 10% of cases 
for testing, an increase to 15% was considered; for these experiments 
problems were adequately minimized by making many networks with shuffled 
fact files. 
 
Once the spreadsheet was made and the various time-displaced moving 
averages were formed, some preliminary experiments were done to determine 
optimum size.  The rule of thumb for establishing the number of neurons is 
to begin at a figure midway between the number of inputs and outputs; for 
our 280 inputs, this yielded an initial size of 140 neurons.  Experiment 
showed, however, that a much smaller number still produced effective 
networks. 
 
The networks were trained using one of the approaches commonly used with 
Neural Network programs(6). Two parameters were varied : the Training 
Tolerance , or maximum acceptable proportional error necessitating no 
adjustment of Network weights, and the proportion of correct facts (a fact 
comprises all of the inputs corresponding to a single day or week, and the 
pattern value corresponding to the inputs).   Training was started with a  
Training Tolerance of .20 and a requirement that the network train until 80 
% of predictions are correct.  These specifications were easily met but  
yielded an unfinished and not very useful network.  The Tolerance was 
subsequently tightened and the number of required correct facts increased 
in turn.  For example, the  program used offers histograms indicating not 
only how many facts cause correct predictions, but also some indication of 
the size of errors on incorrectly predicted facts.  With this information 
useful values for this progressive tightening process become 
apparent(Figure 1).  If in many cases the network misses the first 
tolerance by a small amount, it should pay  to tighten tolerances slightly.  
For other networks it may become obvious that such tightening is 
ineffective until more facts are brought into line at a looser initial 
Tolerance.  The overall predictive capacity of the network may actually be 
damaged if training is continued until the most extreme facts are brought 
within training tolerance.  
 
An overall statistical error for the predictions can also be easily 
calculated, but it has often been observed that this parameter is no more 
than a  loose guide toward actual network performance.  In any case, 
varying the Tolerance and the number of acceptable facts in this way has 
been found to work, and it is common for such networks to behave in an 
almost organic fashion.  Typically when a parameter is varied after having 
been kept constant for a while, the network will in a sense lose its 
equilibrium and perform poorly.  With more adjustments, performance will 
improve, sometimes quite suddenly.Once this alternate variation seems to 
have reached the point of diminshing returns,  statistical analysis may be 
of value in refining the network.  In any case, once training has proceeded 
to its limit(governed in some cases by the amount of time available, in 
others by limitations of the data) predictions are tested.  For the 
experiments set forth below, the same value  was used  as that of 
permissible training error. In practice, testing tolerances are often less 
stringent than those used for training. 
 
Note the training times, and overall error rates for the following neuron 
numbers, based on 4 shuffled replicates of the 143 weekly closes, for a 
total exposure of 572 facts: 
 
Number of Neurons   Avg. Training Time,sec   Number of Errors 
-------------------------------------------------------------
4+18(2 layers)               263                    62 
24                           234                    65 
18                           261                    61 
12                           280                    65 
 
The latest date covered by the data set was April 28, 1995. Shortly after 
this date, the S&P data began to reflect a virtually uninterrupted rise in 
the  market ; networks constructed from such trending data reflect the 
overall trend rather than the influence of specific inputs.  Several 
representative 18- Neuron networks were constructed, and their performance 
against the last six weeks of data was evaluated. 
 
                  Actual	      Network Predicted Value	 
End of Period	Closing Change		 "A"     "B"     "C" 
---------------------------------------------------------------------
3/22/95		 +1.30			-0.25   +0.30   +0.22 
3/29/95		 -0.78			-0.79   -0.38   -0.83	 
4/05/95		 +1.16			+0.06   +0.28   +0.22	 
4/12/95		 -1.90			-1.55   -1.60   -1.65	 
4/19/95		 +2.42			+1.39   +1.27   +2.01	 
4/26/95		 +1.02			+0.50   -0.25   +0.52 
 
It should be noted that even with very brief training and limited use of 
program fine-tuning features, the networks produced good predictions of 
market direction, and passable predictions of magnitudes of price changes.  
This period was marked by no fewer than four reversals of  market 
direction;  if the networks were mere trend-following devices, the 
predictions would not have been as accurate as those tabulated above.  
Similar results were found for networks of other sizes.  The April 5 data 
was poorly forecast by all of the networks observed.  The most plausible 
explanation for this was that over that period market conditions not 
reflected by the input set had a pronounced impact on prices.  Reflecting 
on the many short-term influences that do impact individual securities and 
even sectors, the effectiveness of even the more sophisticated networks 
used by institutions is surprising. Using the statistics generated by the 
program, we were able to determine that despite their simplicity the 
predictive capacity of these weekly S&P Index networks was approximately 
equal to that of many networks in use by financial institutions(7). 
 
For the S&P data set, it seemed plausible that even at these smaller neuron 
numbers the inputs could be pruned.  Using the statistical report 
accompanying the software the sensitivity to inputs was tabulated and the 
10% of inputs ranked as least influential were dropped.  As the program 
faced fewer inputs, training times were similar to those of networks facing 
a full input set even though more runs were required.  Again, several 
representative  networks were tested on the March and April data. 
 
                   Actual		Network Predicted Value	 
End of Period	Closing Change		 "D"     "E"     "F" 
------------------------------------------------------------------
3/22/95		+1.30			+0.29   +0.99   +0.29	 
3/29/95		-0.78			-0.48    0.00   -0.51	 
4/05/95		+1.16			+0.52   +0.73   +0.48	 
4/12/95		-1.90			-1.79   -1.38   -0.83	 
4/19/95		+2.42			+1.32   +0.01   +1.41	 
4/26/95		+1.02			+0.67   -0.08   +0.95 
 
For this small sample, the average error was less for the full data set 
than for the pruned-input networks.  These results are intended to indicate 
the type of adjustments  that are easily done, and to give a rough outline 
of the results that may be obtained.  While the short training times for 
these networks were a byproduct of the effort to minimize expenditure of 
time and money on input data, the speed with which such networks can be 
produced means that replicate networks can be made to produce a sort of 
network consensus decision.  Because each network begins with random 
weights between neurons, the production of several such replicates provides  
the fullest use of the information content of the inputs. 
 
The decision of whether to use the network could be based solely on 
whether it traces the target security's price with sufficient precision.   
Yet it should be noted that if testing indicates that the network at least 
predicts the direction of price moves, even predictions that might be 
classified incorrect by testing criteria may be of value in reinforcing 
investment decisions made using other information; the networks  then 
function as a classification mechanism. 
 
As with any management tool (and indeed, like some Neural Net applications 
not directly concerned with business) the practical function of 
the network is to give added confidence that decisions are correct.  Such 
confidence is a valuable commodity in investing; as a rough estimate of its 
possible value, consider that full-commision brokers may charge several per 
cent of the value of transactions for their services, the most highly 
valued of which is market intelligence. Still, there may be data sets, or 
periods in the fluctuations of particular securities, where useful networks 
may be difficult or even impossible to construct.  Whatever market 
knowledge is gained in constructing the network remains of value whether or 
not the network can be used for real-life decisions. 
 
References
 
1. M.Jurik , "Consumer's Guide to neural network software". Futures, July 
1993
 
2. L. Valentine and D. Ellis, Business Cycles and Economic Forecasting, 
South-Western Publishing, 1991.
 
3. R. Colby and T. Myers, Encyclopedia of Technical Market Indicators, Dow-
Jones Irwin, 1988, Chapter 9
 
4. J. Lawrence, Introduction to Neural Networks, CSS Publishing, 1993
 
5. M. Jurik, Financial Forecasting and Neural Networks, Box 2379, Aptos, CA 
95001, 1991.
 
6. Brainmaker User's Manual, California Scientific Software, 1993.
 
7. J. Lawrence, personal communication.
