Neural Net Primer

A brief introduction to the use of neural networks suitable for futures forecasting

As the cost of computing power has declined, the popularity of Neural Networks as 
an analytical tool to provide solutions to difficult problems has increased 
dramatically.  Once considered an arcane area for academic research, neural nets 
are now widely offered as a tool for financial time-series analysis by individual 
traders and investors.

A lot has been published about Artificial Intelligence and Neural networks.  While 
on the surface, these would seem to be similar, if not identical, avenues of 
research, they are actually quite different.  Artificial intelligence is largely a 
study of symbolic logic, which attempts to emulate the analytical capability of the 
mind and its ability to remember and recall facts.  Typically AI techniques are 
used either for control systems or in expert systems to encapsulate the memories 
and decision-making process of people with encyclopedic knowledge in a particular 
specialty in order to automate response to inquires in that area.  AI computer 
programs are typically written in Lisp and Prolog - languages optimized for dealing 
with symbolic logic.

Neural networks, on the other hand, attempt to duplicate the actual parallel 
processing capability of the nervous system at an elementary level to perform some 
control or analysis function.  The physical implementation could be either a solid-
state circuit or a computer program.  A neural network is composed of simple 
processing elements communicating through a rich set of interconnections with 
variable strengths.  The network is trained rather than programmed, with more 
sophisticated networks being structured to train themselves or learn as they 
process information.

PCs utilize the von Neumann architecture which operates by reading successive 
instructions and data from memory, processing those instructions in a physical CPU 
circuit and returning results back to memory.  By contrast, in neural networks the 
program permeates the structure of interconnected neurons itself.

The elemental network component is a neuron modeled after the biological elements 
of our nervous system and performs its function in three steps.  First, each neuron 
receives a pattern of input signals from either the network inputs or the output of 
other neurons.  The signals enter at points called synapses because of their 
functional similarity to their biological counterparts.  Synapses each have their 
own weights, passing their programmed percentage of input signal into the neuron.  
Secondly, the combined input stimulation is modified by the transfer function of 
the neuron; and third, the output is passed through network interconnections to one 
or more other neurons.

All signals in a neural network are typically normalized to operate within some 
limits such as 0 to +1 or -1 to +1 - a time-consuming part of input data 
preparation.  In addition, input data may be pre-processed or filtered to enhance 
the effectiveness of the network.  Synapses usually have a programmable weighting 
factor that determines the percentage of input signal passed into the neuron.  In 
addition, a neuron can have a threshold level that must be exceeded before any 
signal is passed.  As in our own nervous system, the signal might also be delayed.  
Almost any imaginable synapse weighting transfer functions can be used but simple 
multipliers are fairly common.

The neuron's internal transfer function, called its "activation" in neural-net 
jargon, is almost invariably non-linear.  A common behavior is described as sigmoid 
or S-shaped, with little output being produced until a threshold of combined input 
signal is approached, then rising to some saturation output with little additional 
change as input increases to maximum.  This non-linear "squashing" behavior keeps 
signals within the design limits at each point in the network.  Although signals 
may be selectively routed from the network output back to the input to perform 
recurrent processing, they pass through individual neurons within the network from 
input to output unidirectionally.

Probably the most successful and widely studied neural network system is the 
backpropagation network.  Signals actually flow forward from input to output as 
just described, but the name of this architecture comes from the process used in 
training, or programming the network for use.  To understand backpropagation and 
relate conceptually to our intended use of neural networks, suppose the network 
will be used to track five related markets and produce a forecast of the direction 
of the target market three bars in the future.

Imagine a fully-interconnected network consisting of three layers - five neurons in 
the first, input layer, each with its own input; three neurons in the second layer, 
each receiving an input from each of the first layer neurons; and one neuron in the 
third, output layer receiving the three outputs from the middle layer.  This would 
require 15 interconnections between the first and second layer and 3 
interconnections between the second and third layer, each ending in a synapse.  The 
synaptic weights of these 18 interconnections plus the 5 synapses on the input 
neurons determine the behavior of the network and are the target of programming 
during the training process.  The middle layer is often described as a hidden layer 
because of its lack of direct external connection.

Initially all synaptic weights would be set to low, random values.  The network 
would then be presented with a series of input patterns from the test data set.  
Based on the error between the actual output and the price three bars forward in 
the test data, the synaptic weights would get adjusted in such a manner as make the 
network output more closely approach the known forecast value.  This transfer of 
the output error back to adjust the synaptic weights of the earlier layers is the 
process referred to as backpropagation.

After repeating this process on the test data set many times until the output error 
is within acceptable limits, the synapses would have characteristic weights such 
that the transfer function of the network as a whole would respond to the test 
inputs with the appropriate output value.  At this point the neural network is 
considered "trained".  The synaptic weights are, in effect, the coefficients of 
terms in a non-linear transfer function too complex to have been derived by direct 
mathematical means with any reasonable amount of effort - in our example, an 
expression with over 20 terms!  To the extent that the test data is representative 
of future conditions that the network will see, its output will then provide the 
desired forecast.  This is confirmed by passing test data through the network to 
check that the output error is within acceptable limits before actually putting the 
network into operation.

Complexity of useful neural network structures varies from the simple adaline, or 
ADAptive LINear Element, consisting of a single neuron, to multi-dimensional cube-
like arrays with full interconnection utilizing thousands of neurons, sometimes 
with multiple feedback paths.  The adaline, while it seems simplistic, has been 
quite successful in applications such as high-speed modems or for echo cancellation 
on telephone lines.  Large arrays are more commonly used for pattern recognition 
applications such as artificial vision, weather prediction or turbulent flow study.  
A medium-sized system is more appropriate for our application - correlation of 
several markets and/or other fundamental factors to extract useful forecasting 
signal out of the background market noise.

As the cost-performance of PCs improves, the popularity of neural networks 
continues to increase due to their ability to provide inexpensive, generalized 
solutions to problems such as futures price forecasting which defy analysis by 
conventional means.

Don W. Fitzpatrick - 3/4/97
fitz@interaccess.com
